Assignment 3: Logical Dashboard & Transac-
tional Validation
1. Project Objective
This assignment focuses on evaluating the usability and reliability of a hybrid database sys-
tem through two key components:
•Logical Dashboard Interface– A user-facing interface that presents data in a clear,
structured, and intuitive format. The dashboard should abstract away all underlying
storage complexities and display information as cohesive logical entities, ensuring that
users interact with data without needing to understand how or where it is stored.
•Transactional Behaviour Validation– A set of controlled experiments designed to ver-
ify that the system maintains ACID (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability) proper-
ties during data operations, even when multiple storage backends are involved.
The goal of this assignment is to demonstrate that the system provides a stable and user-
friendly interface while ensuring reliable and correct behaviour under transactional workloads.
Core Technical Pipeline
The Assignment 3 implementation should extend the architecture developed in previous as-
signments with two additional layers.
•Phase 1: Dashboard RenderingDevelop the dashboard to show the data from both
the databases
•Phase 2: Logical Data ReconstructionProvide users with tools to query the data.
•Phase 3: ACID Behaviour ValidationDesign experiments that demonstrate atomicity,
consistency, isolation, and durability within the hybrid storage system.
Deadline
6:00 PM, 5 April 2026
Instructor:Dr. Y ogesh K. Meena
March 23, 2026 • Semester II (2025 - 2026) • CS 432 – Databases(Course Project/Assignment 2)
© 2026 Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar. All rights reserved.
CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 2/Assignment 3) 2
2. Logical Dashboard Requirements
This assignment requires the implementation of a logical dashboard that presents data in a user-
centric form, independent of underlying storage mechanisms.
The dashboard should represent data strictly according to the logical schema and must not expose
any physical storage details.
The dashboard must support:
• Viewing active session information
• Listing logical entities and their instances
• Displaying fields and corresponding values
• Presenting results of executed queries
Constraint:The interface must not reveal backend-specific details such as SQL table names, Mon-
goDB collections, indexing, or schema decisions.
Any implementation medium (web-based or CLI) may be used. Evaluation will focus on correctness
and clarity rather than UI complexity.
3. Logical Query Execution Monitoring
The dashboard must allow submission and observation of logical queries.
Example query:
{
"operation": "read",
"fields": ["username", "comments"]
}
For each query, the system should:
• Interpret the request using metadata
• Generate and execute backend-specific queries
• Merge results into a unified logical response
The dashboard must display:
• Query input
• Logical result
• Execution status
CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 2/Assignment 3) 3
4. Transaction Coordination Layer
This assignment requires a transaction coordination mechanism that ensures consistent execution
across multiple backends.
The system should:
• Treat each operation as a single logical transaction
• Execute backend operations within their respective transactional guarantees
• Detect failures during execution
• Ensure all-or-nothing behaviour
On failure, all partial updates must be rolled back to prevent inconsistent state.
5. ACID Validation Experiments
The system must be evaluated through experiments validating the following properties:
Atomicity
Operations must either fully complete or fully rollback across all backends.
Consistency
All transactions must preserve defined constraints and valid system states.
Isolation
Concurrent transactions must not interfere with each other or produce inconsistent results.
Durability
Committed data must persist reliably, even after system interruptions.
6. Deliverables
The assignment submission must include:
• A single report:group_name_report.pdf
• A short demonstration video
Report Requirements:
• The first page must include:
–GitHub repository link
–Video demonstration link
• Description of dashboard design and implementation
CS 432 Databases (Course Projects - Track 2/Assignment 3) 4
• Explanation of transaction coordination mechanism
• ACID validation experiments and observations
• Discussion of system limitations
7. Marking Criteria
Criterion Focus Area
Dashboard Implementation Logical clarity and correctness
Transaction Coordination Reliable multi-backend execution
ACID Validation Quality of experimental validation
System Robustness Failure and concurrency handling
Report Quality Clarity and technical depth
8. Conclusion
This assignment evaluates the system’s ability to provide a clear logical interface while maintaining
ACID-compliant transactional behaviour across multiple storage backends.
March 23, 2026 • CS 432 – Databases (Course Projects - Track 2/Assignment 3)
© 2026 Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar. All rights reserved.